The error terrain analysis for machine learning tool (often called simply the Error Analysis tool) is similar to InterpretML in that it works to debug machine learning models. However, its specific role is to help debug exactly those classifications within a model that might be subject to errors.23 The tool enables data scientists to identify cohorts of data with high error rates versus the benchmark rate and to visualize how the error rate distributes. Via integration with interpretability techniques and visualizations, users can further diagnose the root causes of the errors by gaining deep insights into the data or model.
The Error Analysis tool solves a core technical challenge in machine learning, which is to determine exactly where a model misclassification occurs. For example, in a dataset of faces for a facial recognition model, the tool might discover that skin tone correlates with misclassification of sex, or that beards or hair colour are a cause of various other misclassifications. By pinpointing exactly where these misclassifications occur, developers can determine how to fix the model to improve its accuracy.
The Error Analysis tool enables machine learning practitioners to efficiently analyse and debug machine learning models’ errors to accelerate improvements in model accuracy and reliability. They can discover new insights about relationships between data features and model performance, dive deeper beyond overall performance metrics by performing a disaggregated evaluation, and discover how errors are distributed in various cohorts. They can further leverage this knowledge to deploy mitigation techniques and improve the model or the data.
As with InterpretML, the Error Analysis tool could be construed as simply a technical fix in order to gain accuracy in machine learning development. But in certain cases, such as facial recognition, failures in classification are ethically significant. For example, inaccuracies with respect to race and sex can both reflect deep fairness issues in society and perpetuate injustice at a systemic level, not to mention their being offensive. And other sorts of inaccuracies in processing visual data – for example with autonomous vehicles – could cause safety concerns.
Once again, technical sophistication and ethics go hand in hand. Ethical mistakes caused by technical errors can be prevented by eliminating these errors from products. As one Microsoft interviewee stated, “We don’t use our customers as testers!” Instead, the company strives to test and adjust a product thoroughly before it ever gets to the customer (though, of course, it does receive customer feedback on improvements that remain to be made, in the form of comments, press, error reports, etc.).

Periodic goal setting and performance evaluations are essential exercises to build alignment and measure progress at any organization. Microsoft has extended these organizational techniques to include considerations of ethics and responsible behaviours.
