The first question in this study stated: What is the strength and direction of the relationship between faculty's perceptions of the importance of course design, communication, time management, and technical competency, and their ability to teach online? To address this question, descriptive statistics (mean and standard deviation) by individual competency items of each of the four competency dimensions: course design, course communication, time management, and technical competency,  were reported in Table 2 on page 23. Most of the items in each competency were rated high for both constructs, Importance, and Ability.
The items manage grades online (M = 4.73) and creating online assignments (M = 4.68)

were rated the highest in the course design competency. In the course communication competency, responding to student questions promptly (M = 4.79) and providing feedback on assignments (M = 4.65) were rated the highest. In time management, scheduling time to design the course prior to delivery (M = 4.65) and spending weekly hours to grade assignments (M = 42 4.54) were rated the highest. In the technical competency, complete basic computer operations (M = 4.74) and navigating within the course in the learning management system (M = 4.67) were rated the highest. As the findings show that competencies in importance for course design and course communication were scored the highest, more support is likely needed for faculty in such competencies.
In the course design competency, manage grades online (M = 4.61) and create online assignments (M = 4.60) were rated the highest items. In course communication, sending announcements/email reminders to course participants (M = 4.82), and use email to communicate with the learners (M = 4.79) were rated the highest items. In time management, schedule weekly hours to facilitate the online course (M = 4.39) and spend weekly hours to grade assignments (M = 4.37) were rated the highest. The complete basic computer operations item (M = 4.64) and navigate within the course in the learning management system item (M = 4.36) were rated the highest in the technical competency. Participants in this study perceived that the top competencies of perception of Importance are similar to the top competencies that faculty perceive as they were able to perform. This Dimension and one of the top competencies in the Time Management Dimension.

In testing the statistical significance of the relationship between self-reported perceptions of the Importance of online teaching competencies and self-reported Ability to teach online, there was a weak positive relationship between the two constructs, r ( 223) = .249, p = <.001.
The second question of this study stated: What demographic factors are related to faculty's perceptions of the importance of course design, communication, time management, and technical competency, and their ability to teach online? In order to address this research question, the demographic information collected from the survey was analyzed. Demographics included participant gender, academic rank, online teaching methods, and level taught. The analysis of the descriptive statistics (mean and standard deviation) of demographic data were presented in Table 5 of page 32, in Chapter IV. Results from ANOVA showed a significant difference in gender and level taught on importance of online teaching competencies. Results from ANOVA also showed no significant differences in gender, academic rank, and online teaching methods, but showed a significant difference in the level taught based on their perceptions of ability to teach online. No significant differences were found in other demographic factors, such as academic rank and online teaching methods. Below is a detailed analysis of the demographic information collected.
